<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h2>
			<p>If there had been no crime, at least something extraordinary had taken place at the château; the impassible justice might have been convinced of it, as soon as he had stepped into the vestibule. The glass door leading to the garden was wide open, and three of the panes were shattered into a thousand pieces. The carpeting of waxed canvas between the doors had been torn up, and on the white marble slabs large drops of blood were visible. At the foot of the staircase was a stain larger than the rest, and upon the lowest step a splash hideous to behold.</p>
			<p>Unfitted for such spectacles, or for the mission he had now to perform, <abbr>M.</abbr> Courtois became faint. Luckily, he borrowed from the idea of his official importance, an energy foreign to his character. The more difficult the preliminary examination of this affair seemed, the more determined he was to carry it on with dignity.</p>
			<p>“Conduct us to the place where you saw the body,” said he to Bertaud. But Papa Plantat intervened.</p>
			<p>“It would be wiser, I think,” he objected, “and more methodical, to begin by going through the house.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps⁠—yes⁠—true, that’s my own view,” said the mayor, grasping at the other’s counsel, as a drowning man clings to a plank. And he made all retire excepting the brigadier and the valet de chambre, the latter remaining to serve as guide. “Gendarmes,” cried he to the men guarding the gate, “see to it that no one goes out; prevent anybody from entering the house, and above all, let no one go into the garden.”</p>
			<p>Then they ascended the staircase. Drops of blood were sprinkled all along the stairs. There was also blood on the baluster, and <abbr>M.</abbr> Courtois perceived, with horror, that his hands were stained.</p>
			<p>When they had reached the first landing-stage, the mayor said to the valet de chambre:</p>
			<p>“Tell me, my friend, did your master and mistress occupy the same chamber?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>
			<p>“And where is their chamber?”</p>
			<p>“There, sir.”</p>
			<p>As he spoke, the valet de chambre staggered back terrified, and pointed to a door, the upper panel of which betrayed the imprint of a bloody hand. Drops of perspiration overspread the poor mayor’s forehead. He too was terrified, and could hardly keep on his feet. Alas, authority brings with it terrible obligations! The brigadier, an old soldier of the Crimea, visibly moved, hesitated.</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Plantat alone, as tranquil as if he were in his garden, retained his coolness, and looked around upon the others.</p>
			<p>“We must decide,” said he.</p>
			<p>He entered the room; the rest followed.</p>
			<p>There was nothing unusual in the apartment; it was a boudoir hung in blue satin, furnished with a couch and four armchairs, covered also with blue satin. One of the chairs was overturned.</p>
			<p>They passed on to the bedchamber.</p>
			<p>A frightful disorder appeared in this room. There was not an article of furniture, not an ornament, which did not betray that a terrible, enraged and merciless struggle had taken place between the assassins and their victims. In the middle of the chamber a small table was overturned, and all about it were scattered lumps of sugar, vermilion cups, and pieces of porcelain.</p>
			<p>“Ah!” said the valet de chambre, “Monsieur and Madame were taking tea when the wretches came in!”</p>
			<p>The mantel ornaments had been thrown upon the floor; the clock, in falling, had stopped at twenty minutes past three. Near the clock were the lamps; the globes were in pieces, the oil had been spilled.</p>
			<p>The canopy of the bed had been torn down, and covered the bed. Someone must have clutched desperately at the draperies. All the furniture was overturned. The coverings of the chairs had been hacked by strokes of a knife, and in places the stuffing protruded. The secretary had been broken open; the writing-slide, dislocated, hung by its hinges; the drawers were open and empty, and everywhere, blood⁠—blood upon the carpet, the furniture, the curtains⁠—above all, upon the bed-curtains.</p>
			<p>“Poor wretches!” stammered the mayor. “They were murdered here.”</p>
			<p>Every one for a moment was appalled. But meanwhile, the justice of the peace devoted himself to a minute scrutiny, taking notes upon his tablets, and looking into every corner. When he had finished:</p>
			<p>“Come,” said he, “let us go into the other rooms.”</p>
			<p>Everywhere there was the same disorder. A band of furious maniacs, or criminals seized with a frenzy, had certainly passed the night in the house.</p>
			<p>The count’s library, especially, had been turned topsy-turvy. The assassins had not taken the trouble to force the locks; they had gone to work with a hatchet. Surely they were confident of not being overheard; for they must have struck tremendous blows to make the massive oaken bureau fly in pieces.</p>
			<p>Neither parlor nor smoking-room had been respected. Couches, chairs, canopies were cut and torn as if they had been lunged at with swords. Two spare chambers for guests were all in confusion.</p>
			<p>They then ascended to the second story.</p>
			<p>There, in the first room which they penetrated, they found, beside a trunk which had been assaulted, but which was not opened, a hatchet for splitting wood which the valet de chambre recognized as belonging to the house.</p>
			<p>“Do you understand now?” said the mayor to <abbr>M.</abbr> Plantat. “The assassins were in force, that’s clear. The murder accomplished, they scattered through the château, seeking everywhere the money they knew they would find here. One of them was engaged in breaking open this trunk, when the others, below, found the money; they called him; he hastened down, and thinking all further search useless, he left the hatchet here.”</p>
			<p>“I see it,” said the brigadier, “just as if I had been here.”</p>
			<p>The ground-floor, which they next visited, had been respected. Only, after the crime had been committed, and the money secured, the murderers had felt the necessity of refreshing themselves. They found the remains of their supper in the dining-room. They had eaten up all the cold meats left in the cupboard. On the table, beside eight empty bottles of wine and liqueurs, were ranged five glasses.</p>
			<p>“There were five of them,” said the mayor.</p>
			<p>By force of will, <abbr>M.</abbr> Courtois had recovered his self-possession.</p>
			<p>“Before going to view the bodies,” said he, “I will send word to the procureur of Corbeil. In an hour, we will have a judge of instruction, who will finish our painful task.”</p>
			<p>A gendarme was instructed to harness the count’s buggy, and to hasten to the procureur. Then the mayor and the justice, followed by the brigadier, the valet de chambre, and the two Bertauds, took their way toward the river.</p>
			<p>The park of Valfeuillu was very wide from right to left. From the house to the Seine it was almost two hundred steps. Before the house was a grassy lawn, interspersed with flowerbeds. Two paths led across the lawn to the riverbank.</p>
			<p>But the murderers had not followed the paths. Making a short cut, they had gone straight across the lawn. Their traces were perfectly visible. The grass was trampled and stamped down as if a heavy load had been dragged over it. In the midst of the lawn they perceived something red; <abbr>M.</abbr> Plantat went and picked it up. It was a slipper, which the valet de chambre recognized as the count’s. Farther on, they found a white silk handkerchief, which the valet declared he had often seen around the count’s neck. This handkerchief was stained with blood.</p>
			<p>At last they arrived at the riverbank, under the willows from which Philippe had intended to cut off a branch; there they saw the body. The sand at this place was much indented by feet seeking a firm support. Everything indicated that here had been the supreme struggle.</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Courtois understood all the importance of these traces.</p>
			<p>“Let no one advance,” said he, and, followed by the justice of the peace, he approached the corpse. Although the face could not be distinguished, both recognized the countess. Both had seen her in this gray robe, adorned with blue trimmings.</p>
			<p>Now, how came she there?</p>
			<p>The mayor thought that having succeeded in escaping from the hands of the murderers, she had fled wildly. They had pursued her, had caught up with her there, and she had fallen to rise no more. This version explained the traces of the struggle. It must have been the count’s body that they had dragged across the lawn.</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Courtois talked excitedly, trying to impose his ideas on the justice. But <abbr>M.</abbr> Plantat hardly listened; you might have thought him a hundred leagues from Valfeuillu; he only responded by monosyllables⁠—yes, no, perhaps. And the worthy mayor gave himself great pains; he went and came, measured steps, minutely scrutinized the ground.</p>
			<p>There was not at this place more than a foot of water. A mud-bank, upon which grew some clumps of flags and some water-lilies, descended by a gentle decline from the bank to the middle of the river. The water was very clear, and there was no current; the slippery and slimy mire could be distinctly seen.</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Courtois had gone thus far in his investigations, when he was struck by a sudden idea.</p>
			<p>“Bertaud,” said he, “come here.”</p>
			<p>The old poacher obeyed.</p>
			<p>“You say that you saw the body from your boat?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Monsieur Mayor.”</p>
			<p>“Where is your boat?”</p>
			<p>“There, hauled up to that field.”</p>
			<p>“Well, lead us to it.”</p>
			<p>It was clear to all that this order had a great effect upon the man. He trembled and turned pale under his rough skin, tanned as it was by sun and storm. He was even seen to cast a menacing look toward his son.</p>
			<p>“Let us go,” said he at last.</p>
			<p>They were returning to the house when the valet proposed to pass over the ditch. “That will be the quickest way,” said he, “I will go for a ladder which we will put across.”</p>
			<p>He went off, and quickly reappeared with his improvised footbridge. But at the moment he was adjusting it, the mayor cried out to him:</p>
			<p>“Stop!”</p>
			<p>The imprints left by the Bertauds on both sides of the ditch had just caught his eye.</p>
			<p>“What is this?” said he; “evidently someone has crossed here, and not long ago; for the traces of the steps are quite fresh.”</p>
			<p>After an examination of some minutes he ordered that the ladder should be placed farther off. When they had reached the boat, he said to Jean, “Is this the boat with which you went to take up your nets this morning?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Then,” resumed <abbr>M.</abbr> Courtois, “what implements did you use? your cast net is perfectly dry; this boat-hook and these oars have not been wet for twenty-four hours.”</p>
			<p>The distress of the father and son became more and more evident.</p>
			<p>“Do you persist in what you say, Bertaud?” said the mayor.</p>
			<p>“Certainly.”</p>
			<p>“And you, Philippe?”</p>
			<p>“Monsieur,” stammered the young man, “we have told the truth.”</p>
			<p>“Really!” said <abbr>M.</abbr> Courtois, in an ironical tone. “Then you will explain to the proper authorities how it was that you could see anything from a boat which you had not entered. It will be proved to you, also, that the body is in a position where it is impossible to see it from the middle of the river. Then you will still have to tell what these footprints on the grass are, which go from your boat to the place where the ditch has been crossed several times and by several persons.”</p>
			<p>The two Bertauds hung their heads.</p>
			<p>“Brigadier,” ordered the mayor, “arrest these two men in the name of the law, and prevent all communication between them.”</p>
			<p>Philippe seemed to be ill. As for old Jean, he contented himself with shrugging his shoulders and saying to his son:</p>
			<p>“Well, you would have it so, wouldn’t you?”</p>
			<p>While the brigadier led the two poachers away, and shut them up separately, and under the guard of his men, the justice and the mayor returned to the park. “With all this,” muttered <abbr>M.</abbr> Courtois, “no traces of the count.”</p>
			<p>They proceeded to take up the body of the countess. The mayor sent for two planks, which, with a thousand precautions, they placed on the ground, being able thus to move the countess without effacing the imprints necessary for the legal examination. Alas! it was indeed she who had been the beautiful, the charming Countess de Tremorel! Here were her smiling face, her lovely, speaking eyes, her fine, sensitive mouth.</p>
			<p>There remained nothing of her former self. The face was unrecognizable, so soiled and wounded was it. Her clothes were in tatters. Surely a furious frenzy had moved the monsters who had slain the poor lady! She had received more than twenty knife-wounds, and must have been struck with a stick, or rather with a hammer; she had been dragged by her feet and by her hair!</p>
			<p>In her left hand she grasped a strip of common cloth, torn, doubtless, from the clothes of one of the assassins. The mayor, in viewing the spectacle, felt his legs fail him, and supported himself on the arm of the impassible Plantat.</p>
			<p>“Let us carry her to the house,” said the justice, “and then we will search for the count.”</p>
			<p>The valet and brigadier (who had now returned) called on the domestics for assistance. The women rushed into the garden. There was then a terrible concert of cries, lamentations, and imprecations.</p>
			<p>“The wretches! So noble a mistress! So good a lady!”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> and <abbr>Mme.</abbr> de Tremorel, one could see, were adored by their people.</p>
			<p>The countess had just been laid upon the billiard-table, on the ground-floor, when the judge of instruction and a physician were announced.</p>
			<p>“At last!” sighed the worthy mayor; and in a lower tone he added, “the finest medals have their reverse.”</p>
			<p>For the first time in his life, he seriously cursed his ambition, and regretted being the most important personage in Orcival.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
