<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
			<p>A small, fine, chilly rain had succeeded the morning fog; but Sauvresy did not perceive it. He went across the fields with his head bare, wandering at hazard, without aim or discretion. He talked aloud as he went, stopping ever and anon, then resuming his course. The peasants who met him⁠—they all knew him⁠—turned to look at him after having saluted him, asking themselves whether the master of Valfeuillu had not gone mad. Unhappily he was not mad. Overwhelmed by an unheard-of, unlooked-for catastrophe, his brain had been for a moment paralyzed. But one by one he collected his scattered ideas and acquired the faculty of thinking and of suffering. Each one of his reflections increased his mortal anguish. Yes, Bertha and Hector had deceived, had dishonored him. She, beloved to idolatry; he, his best and oldest friend, a wretch that he had snatched from misery, who owed him everything. And it was in his house, under his own roof, that this infamy had taken place. They had taken advantage of his noble trust, had made a dupe of him. The frightful discovery not only embittered the future, but also the past. He longed to blot out of his life these years passed with Bertha, with whom, but the night before, he had recalled these “happiest years of his life.” The memory of his former happiness filled his soul with disgust. But how had this been done? When? How was it he had seen nothing of it? And now things came into his mind which should have warned him had he not been blind. He recalled certain looks of Bertha, certain tones of voice, which were an avowal. At times, he tried to doubt. There are misfortunes so great that to be believed there must be more than evidence.</p>
			<p>“It is not possible!” muttered he.</p>
			<p>Seating himself upon a prostrate tree in the midst of Mauprévoir forest, he studied the fatal letter for the tenth time within four hours.</p>
			<p>“It proves all,” said he, “and it proves nothing.”</p>
			<p>And he read once more.</p>
			<p>“Do not go tomorrow to Petit-Bourg⁠—”</p>
			<p>Well, had he not again and again, in his idiotic confidence, said to Hector:</p>
			<p>“I shall be away tomorrow, stay here and keep Bertha company.”</p>
			<p>This sentence, then, had no positive signification. But why add:</p>
			<p>“Or rather, return before breakfast.”</p>
			<p>This was what betrayed fear, that is, the fault. To go away and return again anon, was to be cautious, to avoid suspicion. Then, why “he,” instead of, “Clement?” This word was striking. “He”⁠—that is, the dear one, or else, the master that one hates. There is no medium⁠—’tis the husband, or the lover. “He,” is never an indifferent person. A husband is lost when his wife, in speaking of him, says, “He.”</p>
			<p>But when had Bertha written these few lines? Doubtless some evening after they had retired to their room. He had said to her, “I’m going tomorrow to Melun,” and then she had hastily scratched off this note and given it, in a book, to Hector.</p>
			<p>Alas! the edifice of his happiness, which had seemed to him strong enough to defy every tempest of life, had crumbled, and he stood there lost in the midst of its debris. No more happiness, joys, hopes⁠—nothing! All his plans for the future rested on Bertha; her name was mingled in his every dream, she was at once the future and the dream. He had so loved her that she had become something of himself, that he could not imagine himself without her. Bertha lost to him, he saw no direction in life to take, he had no further reason for living. He perceived this so vividly that the idea of suicide came to him. He had his gun, powder and balls; his death would be attributed to a hunting accident, and all would be over.</p>
			<p>Oh, but the guilty ones!</p>
			<p>They would doubtless go on in their infamous comedy⁠—would seem to mourn for him, while really their hearts would bound with joy. No more husband, no more hypocrisies or terrors. His will giving his fortune to Bertha, they would be rich. They would sell everything, and would depart rejoicing to some distant clime. As to his memory, poor man, it would amuse them to think of him as the cheated and despised husband.</p>
			<p>“Never!” cried he, drunk with fury, “never! I must kill myself, but first, I must avenge my dishonor!”</p>
			<p>But he tried in vain to imagine a punishment cruel or terrible enough. What chastisement could expiate the horrible tortures which he endured? He said to himself that, in order to assure his vengeance, he must wait⁠—and he swore that he would wait. He would feign the same stolid confidence, and resigned himself to see and hear everything.</p>
			<p>“My hypocrisy will equal theirs,” thought he.</p>
			<p>Indeed a cautious duplicity was necessary. Bertha was most cunning, and at the first suspicion would fly with her lover. Hector had already⁠—thanks to him⁠—several hundred thousand francs. The idea that they might escape his vengeance gave him energy and a clear head.</p>
			<p>It was only then that he thought of the flight of time, the rain falling in torrents, and the state of his clothes.</p>
			<p>“Bah!” thought he, “I will make up some story to account for myself.”</p>
			<p>He was only a league from Valfeuillu, but he was an hour and a half reaching home. He was broken, exhausted; he felt chilled to the marrow of his bones. But when he entered the gate, he had succeeded in assuming his usual expression, and the gayety which so well hinted his perfect trustfulness. He had been waited for, but in spite of his resolutions, he could not sit at table between this man and woman, his two most cruel enemies. He said that he had taken cold, and would go to bed. Bertha insisted in vain that he should take at least a bowl of broth and a glass of claret.</p>
			<p>“Really,” said he, “I don’t feel well.”</p>
			<p>When he had retired, Bertha said:</p>
			<p>“Did you notice, Hector?”</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>“Something unusual has happened to him.”</p>
			<p>“Very likely, after being all day in the rain.”</p>
			<p>“No. His eye had a look I never saw before.”</p>
			<p>“He seemed to be very cheerful, as he always is.”</p>
			<p>“Hector, my husband suspects!”</p>
			<p>“He? Ah, my poor good friend has too much confidence in us to think of being jealous.”</p>
			<p>“You deceive yourself, Hector; he did not embrace me when he came in, and it is the first time since our marriage.”</p>
			<p>Thus, at the very first, he had made a blunder. He knew it well; but it was beyond his power to embrace Bertha at that moment; and he was suffering more than he thought he should. When his wife and his friend ascended to his room, after dinner, they found him shivering under the sheets, red, his forehead burning, his throat dry, and his eyes shining with an unusual brilliancy. A fever soon came on, attended by delirium. A doctor was called, who at first said he would not answer for him. The next day he was worse. From this time both Hector and Bertha conceived for him the most tender devotion. Did they think they should thus in some sort expiate their crime? It is doubtful. More likely they tried to impose on the people about them; everyone was anxious for Sauvresy. They never deserted him for a moment, passing the night by turns near his bed. And it was painful to watch over him; a furious delirium never left him. Several times force had to be used to keep him on the bed; he tried to throw himself out of the window. The third day he had a strange fancy; he did not wish to stay in his chamber. He kept crying out:</p>
			<p>“Carry me away from here, carry me away from here.”</p>
			<p>The doctor advised that he should be humored; so a bed was made up for him in a little room on the ground-floor, overlooking the garden. His wanderings did not betray anything of his suspicions; perhaps the firm will was able even to control the delirium. The fever finally yielded on the ninth day. His breathing became calmer, and he slept. When he awoke, reason had returned. That was a frightful moment. He had, so to speak, to take up the burden of his misery. At first he thought it the memory of a horrid nightmare; but no. He had not dreamed. He recalled the Belle Image, Jenny, the forest, the letter. What had become of the letter? Then, having the vague impression of a serious illness, he asked himself if he had said anything to betray the source of his misery. This anxiety prevented his making the slightest movement, and he opened his eyes softly and cautiously. It was eleven at night, and all the servants had gone to bed. Hector and Bertha alone were keeping watch; he was reading a paper, she was crocheting. Sauvresy saw by their placid countenances that he had betrayed nothing. He moved slightly; Bertha at once arose and came to him.</p>
			<p>“How are you, dear Clement?” asked she, kissing him fondly on the forehead.</p>
			<p>“I am no longer in pain.”</p>
			<p>“You see the result of being careless.”</p>
			<p>“How many days have I been sick?”</p>
			<p>“Eight days.”</p>
			<p>“Why was I brought here?”</p>
			<p>“Because you wished it.”</p>
			<p>Trémorel had approached the bedside.</p>
			<p>“You refused to stay upstairs,” said he, “you were ungovernable till we had you brought here.”</p>
			<p>“But don’t tire yourself,” resumed Hector. “Go to sleep again, and you will be well by tomorrow. And good night, for I am going to bed now, and shall return and wake your wife at four o’clock.”</p>
			<p>He went out, and Bertha, having given Sauvresy something to drink, returned to her seat.</p>
			<p>“What a friend Trémorel is,” murmured she. Sauvresy did not answer this terribly ironical exclamation. He shut his eyes, pretended to sleep, and thought of the letter. What had he done with it? He remembered that he had carefully folded it and put it in the right-hand pocket of his vest. He must have this letter. It would balk his vengeance, should it fall into his wife’s hands; and this might happen at any moment. It was a miracle that his valet had not put it on the mantel, as he was accustomed to do with the things which he found in his master’s pockets. He was reflecting on some means of getting it, of the possibility of going up to his bedroom, where his vest ought to be, when Bertha got up softly. She came to the bed and whispered gently:</p>
			<p>“Clement, Clement!”</p>
			<p>He did not open his eyes, and she, persuaded that he was sleeping, though very lightly, stole out of the room, holding her breath as she went.</p>
			<p>“Oh, the wretch!” muttered Sauvresy, “she is going to <em>him</em>!”</p>
			<p>At the same time the necessity of recovering the letter occurred to him more vividly than ever.</p>
			<p>“I can get to my room,” thought he, “without being seen, by the garden and backstairs. She thinks I’m asleep; I shall get back and abed before she returns.”</p>
			<p>Then, without asking himself whether he were not too feeble, or what danger there might be in exposing himself to the cold, he got up, threw a gown around him, put on his slippers and went toward the door.</p>
			<p>“If anyone sees me, I will feign delirium,” said he to himself.</p>
			<p>The vestibule lamp was out and he found some difficulty in opening the door; finally, he descended into the garden. It was intensely cold, and snow had fallen. The wind shook the limbs of the trees crusted with ice. The front of the house was sombre. One window only was lighted⁠—that of Trémorel’s room; that was lighted brilliantly, by a lamp and a great blazing fire. The shadow of a man⁠—of Hector⁠—rested on the muslin curtains; the shape was distinct. He was near the window, and his forehead was pressed against the panes. Sauvresy instinctively stopped to look at his friend, who was so at home in his house, and who, in exchange for the most brotherly hospitality, had brought dishonor, despair and death.</p>
			<p>Hector made a sudden movement, and turned around as if he was surprised by an unwonted noise. What was it? Sauvresy only knew too well. Another shadow appeared on the curtain⁠—that of Bertha. And he had forced himself to doubt till now! Now proofs had come without his seeking. What had brought her to that room, at that hour? She seemed to be talking excitedly. He thought he could hear that full, sonorous voice, now as clear as metal, now soft and caressing, which had made all the chords of passion vibrate in him. He once more saw those beautiful eyes which had reigned so despotically over his heart, and whose expressions he knew so well. But what was she doing? Doubtless she had gone to ask Hector something, which he refused her, and she was pleading with him; Sauvresy saw that she was supplicating, by her motions; he knew the gesture well. She lifted her clasped hands as high as her forehead, bent her head, half shut her eyes. What languor had been in her voice when she used to say:</p>
			<p>“Say, dear Clement, you will, will you not?”</p>
			<p>And now she was using the same blandishments on another. Sauvresy was obliged to support himself against a tree. Hector was evidently refusing what she wished; then she shook her finger menacingly, and tossed her head angrily, as if she were saying:</p>
			<p>“You won’t? You shall see, then.”</p>
			<p>And then she returned to her supplications.</p>
			<p>“Ah,” thought Sauvresy, “<em>he</em> can resist her prayers; <em>I</em> never had such courage. He can preserve his coolness, his will, when she looks at him; I never said no to her; rather, I never waited for her to ask anything of me; I have passed my life in watching her lightest fancies, to gratify them. Perhaps that is what has ruined me!”</p>
			<p>Hector was obstinate, and Bertha was roused little by little; she must be angry. She recoiled, holding out her arms, her head thrown back; she was threatening him. At last he was conquered; he nodded, “Yes.” Then she flung herself upon him, and the two shadows were confounded in a long embrace.</p>
			<p>Sauvresy could not repress an agonized cry, which was lost amid the noises of the night. He had asked for certainty; here it was. The truth, indisputable, evident, was clear to him. He had to seek for nothing more, now, except for the means to punish surely and terribly. Bertha and Hector were talking amicably. Sauvresy saw that she was about to go downstairs, and that he could not now go for the letter. He went in hurriedly, forgetting, in his fear of being discovered, to lock the garden door. He did not perceive that he had been standing with naked feet in the snow, till he had returned to his bedroom again; he saw some flakes on his slippers, and they were damp; quickly he threw them under the bed, and jumped in between the clothes, and pretended to be asleep.</p>
			<p>It was time, for Bertha soon came in. She went to the bed, and thinking that he had not woke up, returned to her embroidery by the fire. Trémorel also soon reappeared; he had forgotten to take his paper, and had come back for it. He seemed uneasy.</p>
			<p>“Have you been out tonight, Madame?” asked he, in a low voice.</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>“Have all the servants gone to bed?”</p>
			<p>“I suppose so; but why do you ask?”</p>
			<p>“Since I have been upstairs, somebody has gone out into the garden, and come back again.”</p>
			<p>Bertha looked at him with a troubled glance.</p>
			<p>“Are you sure of what you say?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly. Snow is falling, and whoever went out brought some back on his shoes. This has melted in the vestibule⁠—”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mme.</abbr> Sauvresy seized the lamp, and interrupting Hector, said:</p>
			<p>“Come.”</p>
			<p>Trémorel was right. Here and there on the vestibule pavement were little puddles.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps this water has been here some time,” suggested Bertha.</p>
			<p>“No. It was not there an hour ago, I could swear. Besides, see, here is a little snow that has not melted yet.”</p>
			<p>“It must have been one of the servants.”</p>
			<p>Hector went to the door and examined it.</p>
			<p>“I do not think so,” said he. “A servant would have shut the bolts; here they are, drawn back. Yet I myself shut the door tonight, and distinctly recollect fastening the bolts.”</p>
			<p>“It’s very strange!”</p>
			<p>“And all the more so, look you, because the traces of the water do not go much beyond the drawing-room door.”</p>
			<p>They remained silent, and exchanged anxious looks. The same terrible thought occurred to them both.</p>
			<p>“If it were he?”</p>
			<p>But why should he have gone into the garden? It could not have been to spy on them.</p>
			<p>They did not think of the window.</p>
			<p>“It couldn’t have been Clement,” said Bertha, at last. “He was asleep when I went back, and he is in a calm and deep slumber now.”</p>
			<p>Sauvresy, stretched upon his bed, heard what his enemies were saying. He cursed his imprudence.</p>
			<p>“Suppose,” thought he, “they should think of looking at my gown and slippers!”</p>
			<p>Happily this simple idea did not occur to them; after reassuring each other as well as they were able, they separated; but each heart carried an anxious doubt. Sauvresy on that night had a terrible crisis in his illness. Delirium, succeeding this ray of reason, renewed its possession of his brain. The next morning <abbr>Dr.</abbr> R⁠⸺ pronounced him in more danger than ever; and sent a despatch to Paris, saying that he would be detained at Valfeuillu three or four days. The distemper redoubled in violence; very contradictory symptoms appeared. Each day brought some new phase of it, which confounded the foresight of the doctors. Every time that Sauvresy had a moment of reason, the scene at the window recurred to him, and drove him to madness again.</p>
			<p>On that terrible night when he had gone out into the snow, he had not been mistaken; Bertha was really begging something of Hector. This was it:</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Courtois, the mayor, had invited Hector to accompany himself and his family on an excursion to Fontainebleau on the following day. Hector had cordially accepted the invitation. Bertha could not bear the idea of his spending the day in Laurence’s company, and begged him not to go. She told him there were plenty of excuses to relieve him from his promise; for instance, he might urge that it would not be seemly for him to go when his friend lay dangerously ill. At first he positively refused to grant her prayer, but by her supplications and menaces she persuaded him, and she did not go downstairs until he had sworn that he would write to <abbr>M.</abbr> Courtois that very evening declining the invitation. He kept his word, but he was disgusted by her tyrannical behavior. He was tired of forever sacrificing his wishes and his liberty, so that he could plan nothing, say or promise nothing without consulting this jealous woman, who would scarcely let him wander out of her sight. The chain became heavier and heavier to bear, and he began to see that sooner or later it must be wrenched apart. He had never loved either Bertha or Jenny, or anyone, probably; but he now loved the mayor’s daughter. Her dowry of a million had at first dazzled him, but little by little he had been subdued by Laurence’s charms of mind and person. He, the dissipated rake, was seduced by such grave and naive innocence, such frankness and beauty; he would have married Laurence had she been poor⁠—as Sauvresy married Bertha. But he feared Bertha too much to brave her suddenly, and so he waited. The next day after the quarrel about Fontainebleau, he declared that he was indisposed, attributed it to the want of exercise, and took to the saddle for several hours every day afterward. But he did not go far; only to the mayor’s. Bertha at first did not perceive anything suspicious in Trémorel’s rides; it reassured her to see him go off on his horse. After some days, however, she thought she saw in him a certain feeling of satisfaction concealed under the semblance of fatigue. She began to have doubts, and these increased every time he went out; all sorts of conjectures worried her while he was away. Where did he go? Probably to see Laurence, whom she feared and detested. The suspicion soon became a certainty with her. One evening Hector appeared, carrying in his buttonhole a flower which Laurence herself had put there, and which he had forgotten to take out. Bertha took it gently, examined it, smelt it, and, compelling herself to smile:</p>
			<p>“Why,” said she, “what a pretty flower!”</p>
			<p>“So I thought,” answered Hector, carelessly, “though I don’t know what it is called.”</p>
			<p>“Would it be bold to ask who gave it to you?”</p>
			<p>“Not at all. It’s a present from our good Plantat.”</p>
			<p>All Orcival knew that <abbr>M.</abbr> Plantat, a monomaniac on flowers, never gave them away to anyone except <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Laurence. Hector’s evasion was an unhappy one, and Bertha was not deceived.</p>
			<p>“You promised me, Hector,” said she, “not to see Laurence any more, and to give up this marriage.”</p>
			<p>He tried to reply.</p>
			<p>“Let me speak,” she continued, “and explain yourself afterward. You have broken your word⁠—you are deceiving my confidence! But I tell you, you shall not marry her!” Then, without awaiting his reply, she overwhelmed him with reproaches. Why had he come here at all? She was happy in her home before she knew him. She did not love Sauvresy, it was true; but she esteemed him, and he was good to her. Ignorant of the happiness of true love, she did not desire it. But he had come, and she could not resist his fascination. And now, after having engaged her affection, he was going to desert her, to marry another! Trémorel listened to her, perfectly amazed at her audacity. What! She dared to pretend that it was he who had abused her innocence, when, on the contrary, he had sometimes been astonished at her persistency! Such was the depth of her corruption, as it seemed to him, that he wondered whether he were her first or her twentieth lover. And she had so led him on, and had so forcibly made him feel the intensity of her will, that he had been fain still to submit to this despotism. But he had now determined to resist on the first opportunity; and he resisted.</p>
			<p>“Well, yes,” said he, frankly, “I did deceive you; I have no fortune⁠—this marriage will give me one; I shall get married.” He went on to say that he loved Laurence less than ever, but that he coveted her money more and more every day. “To prove this,” he pursued, “if you will find me tomorrow a girl who has twelve hundred thousand francs instead of a million, I will marry her in preference to Mademoiselle Courtois.”</p>
			<p>She had never suspected he had so much courage. She had so long moulded him like soft wax, and this unexpected conduct disconcerted her. She was indignant, but at the same time she felt that unhealthy satisfaction that some women feel, when they meet a master who subdues them; and she admired Trémorel more than ever before. This time, he had taken a tone which conquered her; she despised him enough to think him quite capable of marrying for money. When he had done, she said:</p>
			<p>“It’s really so, then; you only care for the million of dowry?”</p>
			<p>“I’ve sworn it to you a hundred times.”</p>
			<p>“Truly now, don’t you love Laurence?”</p>
			<p>“I have never loved her, and never shall.” He thought that he would thus secure his peace until the wedding-day; once married, he cared not what would happen. What cared he for Sauvresy? Life is only a succession of broken friendships. What is a friend, after all? One who can and ought to serve you. Ability consists in breaking with people, when they cease to be useful to you.</p>
			<p>Bertha reflected.</p>
			<p>“Hear me, Hector,” said she at last. “I cannot calmly resign myself to the sacrifice which you demand. Let me have but a few days, to accustom myself to this dreadful blow. You owe me as much⁠—let Clement get well, first.”</p>
			<p>He did not expect to see her so gentle and subdued; who would have looked for such concessions, so easily obtained? The idea of a snare did not occur to him. In his delight he betrayed how he rejoiced in his liberty, which ought to have undeceived Bertha; but she did not perceive it. He grasped her hand, and cried:</p>
			<p>“Ah, you are very good⁠—you really love me.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
